[Music]
if there's something that stresses
people out its financial problems on
March 11th 2020 the corona virus
outbreak was officially declared a
pandemic kovat 19 not only started to
threaten people's health on a global
scale it also severely affected the
economy when you're laid off by your
company or your business has to shut
down or this crisis damages your
finances in any other way there's a
likelihood that you're struggling to
make ends meet money problems often
caused anxiety because they are a direct
threat to our sense of self-preservation
what if I have no income what if I
become poor what's going to happen next
in this video I would like to share six
stoic teachings that will not solve your
money problems directly but might help
you to change your perspective regain
your focus and tranquility and get
through financially difficult times
[Music]
one gets back to basics
the ancient Stoics were masters at
observing human nature and the nature of
reality being closely related to the
cynic school they didn't put too much
value on material wealth time for them
was the greatest commodity and our
ability to choose an act they saw as
much more valuable than any amount of
money will ever be wealth surely is nice
but not only is it beyond our control it
isn't necessary to be happy either to
survive we need food and shelter and for
the majority of the world's population
even in the poor regions of the world
this bare minimum is available if you've
got access to YouTube then you probably
have your basic needs met but for many
people this isn't enough especially in
developed countries there's so much more
to money besides it being a way to pay
for survival we might want to ask
ourselves why are we so attached to our
current income why can't we do at least
temporarily with less is it because we
want to keep up with the Joneses do we
have a social circle that attaches a lot
of importance to status perhaps we are
afraid to lose our spouse if we fail to
keep our wealth intact fidelity
purchased with money money can destroy
stoic philosopher Seneca once wrote here
is another quote by Seneca to keep in
mind suppose that you hold wealth to be
a good poverty will then distress you
and which is most pitiable
it will be an imaginary poverty for you
may be rich and nevertheless because
your neighbor is richer you suppose
yourself to be poor exactly by the same
amount in which you fall short of your
neighbor and quote anything that goes
beyond survival is basically obsolete
it's nice to have status for example but
according to stoic philosophy we must be
willing to give that up if that's the
price we pay for tranquility to focus on
what we can influence there's no single
worry in the world that can stop bad
things from happening
yet when we're struggling financially
we're often immersed in the future and
try to control things that we have no
power over our greatest fear might be
losing our money and not being able to
pay the bills but not having money
doesn't take away the strongest tool we
have which is our ability to act taking
action doesn't happen in the past nor
does it happen in the future
it happens exclusively in the present
the present is where the future is made
therefore
worrying is not only a complete waste of
time
it's detrimental to our ability to act
when we shoot instead of staring at a
long endless road of obstacles we can
compartmentalize our undertakings and
focus on the task at hand only what we
can change right now is what counts 3
ask for help
the Stoics observed that everything
nature comes up with has a part in the
play we're all in this together and by
helping each other out in difficult
times we act in the benefit of the whole
looking at the way people behave during
a crisis like the covert 19 crisis for
example we can conclude that human
nature has an inclination to help a
fellow human out moreover there's a lot
of research indicating that helping
people makes you happy in his
meditations Marcus Aurelius wrote that
we shouldn't be afraid to ask each other
for help I quote don't be ashamed to
need help like a soldier storming a wall
you have a mission to accomplish and if
you've been wounded and you need a
comrade to pull you up
so what end quote when we look at the
nature of the universe we'll discover
that everything is interconnected we
depend on our surroundings on the oxygen
we breathe on the power plant that
supplies our homes with electricity on
the people that pick up our trash and so
on refusing to ask help in an
interdependent world is kind of insane
for remember that you're not alone if
you're at least a bit wealthy then you
can set yourself apart from an enormous
group of people especially in Western
Europe there's such a strong social
safety net that it takes quite some
hardship
and bad luck to become truly poor no
matter where you're from your financial
struggles could lead to the loss of
wealth this is what scares people the
biggest fear of the wealthy is the fear
to lose it all
Seneca for example was quite hung up on
themes like wealth and poverty as a rich
statesman he was aware of the burden
that the rich bear which is that what
you can have you can lose but so he
thought I may become a poor man I shall
then be one among many and quote when
you look at it from a wider perspective
you'll see that you're far from alone
when you struggle financially so many
people live in poverty so many live
paycheck to paycheck so you might lose
your wealth but then you'll share your
troubles with many souls 5 put your
tranquillity first stoic philosopher
Epictetus was very clear about this your
peace of mind is more important than
outside affairs yet when we're
struggling financially we often let
external circumstances decide our mood
this doesn't mean that we shouldn't try
to improve our financial situation it
means that from a stoic point of view we
have to set our priorities straight
looking for work doubling down on our
business finding ways to make money on
the side there's nothing wrong with that
as long as we don't sacrifice our mental
well-being I quote if you want to
improve reject such reasonings as these
if I neglect my affairs I'll have no
income if I don't correct my servant he
will be bad for it is better to die with
hunger exempt from grief and fear than
to live in effluence with perturbation
and it is better your servant should be
bad than you unhappy and quote this may
seem a bit unrealistic and extreme but
since the Stoics value time more than
anything they would argue that we should
always aim to be happy under any
circumstances a simple method that
modern Stoics use to make peace with an
uncertain future is amor fati this latin
phrase means love of fate amor fati is
the practice of embracing the future
regardless of the outcome I've made a
separate video about this six remember
what you do have
lastly we tend to overlook the things we
have and focus on the things we haven't
this is probably because we take so many
things for granted that we actually
forget how blessed we are Marcus
Aurelius teaches us to ignore what we
don't have and try to imagine what it's
like to don't have what we actually have
I quote look at what you have the things
you value most and think how much you
would crave them if you didn't have them
but be careful don't feel such
satisfaction that you start to overvalue
them that it would upset you to lose
them and quote there's much more to life
besides money your health your body your
relationships your freedom but the most
important thing we possess is our
ability to choose in any given situation
we have the power to choose how we deal
with it and that's priceless thank you
for watching
[Music]
you